Kiwi, I can tell you,
I think Nia is joining us by Zoom.
Oh, is she? Uh, professor Higgins, are you on the Zoom?
Hi. No, my Haida, my Professor Higgins.
Dear Uh, welcome.
We've got the Maori Fe Select Committee here.
We've got your team, um, the four Deputy Chief Executives
and the Chief executive.
Um, and this is to discuss, um, uh,
uh, I guess a annual review.
Um, so welcome and it's really good to see you all here.
Um, we representatives from across Parliament, parliament,
um, keen to have a good discussion with you around, uh,
the Maori Language Commission, uh,
and your work and your mahi.
Uh, so thank you for the work in that you do.
Um, I will offer, just so you've got, just so you know,
we've got about 45 minutes.
We're a bit behind, so, um, maybe have some brief comments
to start and then we'll just throw it open to questions.
So Alda, um, yep.
Uh, professor over to you if you wish
to make some opening remarks.
Uh, thank you all for having us today.
Um, my apologies, as I said
before, um, for not being there in person,
I had always planned to be,
but of course, I'm back here at my marae, uh, at a,
for my Aunt Tki, who of course has been a war of the
movement, uh, one of the critical movements, uh,
for language revitalization.
And they've all just arrived.
Uh, the whole country has arrived from the country all
around the country, uh, to pay their respects to her.
So it's almost kind of fitting that, uh, while we are here
behind me, literally, uh, talking about the language, um,
that we are here this morning, um, on behalf
of the commission, uh, we are proud
of the achievements we've made, uh, the past year.
I'm proud to have a team who work, uh, extremely hard
to uplift the, the crown strategy, the mahi corona, uh,
for language revitalization.
Uh, and to be able to leave that is, is truly a humbling,
uh, position to be in.
Um, but also an important one.
And so, um, thank you for having us today.
Hilda Ilda, uh, professor.
Um, so I don't know if you are the chief executive would
like to make any remarks,
otherwise, we'll open it up to questions.
Uh, look, just to, to back up what my, um,
what my boss has said, um, and,
and to, um, you know, uh, to relay my gratitude to her
for her support, not just over the last year or so,
but over the last five years, and the faith
and the trust that she has in us to get our work done.
Um, we, you won't hear us crying
about how much money we get.
'cause every every cent we've got, we try to make it count.
We've got, uh, a big job to do.
And we've got a big week coming up, uh, next month.
Uh, and, and our belief is that, um, you know,
all New Zealanders have the right
to learn and to speak to al Maori,
Maori Maori, 14th to the 21st.
Um, and but also that it's,
it's really important to be kind.
Uh, there's a, uh, you know, there is a, um, the school
of thought, the, uh, you grow people
and you eviscerate them if they mispronounce
the language, those types of things.
And that's not our approach. Our approach is underpinned
by mana, which is making it safe
for all people to learn to be Maori.
Um, and which is about understanding our commonalities,
the thing that, the things that bring us together
as New Zealand, rather than the things that divide us.
And then finally using data.
And that's been really, really
important in the work that we do.
Understanding, for instance, that something like the Maori,
uh, language moment, which has multiple access points
for New Zealand is to, to be a part of,
rather than my initial idea, which was a haka.
Um, and even I won't haka now because I've got a gut on me
and it looks pretty funny when I start doing a haka.
So look at, um, really,
really proud of what our fare has done.
Really proud of the people that have come with me today.
And I'm really proud to work with, um, a wonderful chair,
Um, members who wishes to start with questions today.
Yeah, sure thing. Yeah.
Um, so I know you do just wonderful work
and, um, for all New Zealanders
and the is so, um, such a tanga here.
So what would be the ultimate goal for Maori language
revitalization and, um, retention?
And if you did have, um, the budget, what
would, what else would you be doing?
Like on top of what you are,
all the amazing things you're already doing,
like aspirationally
Well, I'll let my chair answer this running.
Sure. Uh, um, I think, you know,
sometimes you can, questions like
that is always hard to answer.
'cause where do you start? I mean, this is a, uh, one
of the things that I've always tried to relay in my, um,
speeches has been around,
it takes one generation to lose a language.
It takes three generations to restore.
And often it's a challenge to kind of plan out
for three generations of restoration of a language, uh,
in, in a one yearly budget.
And so I think what we have tried to attempt to do is as,
nah, we said, is try
and open up the language to all people of this country.
And because we dunno if they're going to become the parents
or the grandparents of our future.
And I think when we think about
and plan in that kind of way, we want to be able to ensure
that everyone is part of the journey.
And so trying to, uh, enable, um, whanau,
uh, across the country to be able to engage
with our language because they don't know if their future
grandchildren will be Maori.
And we wanna be able to let them proudly say
to their grandchildren, and in a certain time, this is
what I did as part of the contribution
to revitalizing your heritage language.
And so one of the things we have found,
because the mahi corona is, uh, the vision is,
which of course means let the language be everywhere spread
as far and wide as possible.
So any opportunity to have a public, uh, engagement
with re we want to be able to support that.
And I think, uh, many
of the things we've invested in has been to try
and hit the masses of people so
that they can have a little bit.
And it's not about overwhelming people with,
with like full on fluency, proficiency levels of language,
but actually getting them to, to see
that te Maori is very much part of our environment.
It's everywhere in our environment.
And so how do we as New Zealanders embrace that as part
of our unifying, um, identity?
Any sense? I probably didn't answer your question on
what we could spend it on,
but there's always, uh, we always open
to any opportunities for extra budget.
Can can I add to that? Yeah.
Look, one of the things, um, that I would do
with extra money, that doesn't have to come to us either.
Um, we have an infrastructure that has been around
for at least 20, 25 years now.
When the act was renewed in 2016,
there was no new investment in
that infrastructure other than the money that was given
to Mm-Hmm.
And, uh, 10 million of that came from our budget.
Now, if there was an investment to be made
by the government, it would be a new kukopa
because we have a long waiting list of children
to get into Kura Mm.
And to get into KOA and Punal, you know, and,
and we know that the bulk
of our new Maori speakers are coming out of Kura, kapa,
and these kids are going onto to university
and are achieving at really, really high levels.
So one of the things that, that I think we would like
to see strategically specific, especially if we're gonna get
to that target of, um, you know, of a million speakers
by 2014, there's some augmentation
and strengthening of the Maori language infrastructure.
Mm-Hmm. Because if you look at the Ma Mahi
Corona, you've got three areas.
So you've got Al, which is really status and value,
or the, you know, status of the language.
And then the next one is acquisition,
and then the final one is use.
And if you look at those three things,
and you take us to, uh,
and to, we are all in that first one, you know, trying
to shepherd people towards the infrastructure,
towards acquisition, because that's where the learning
and the use begins.
And so if you don't have people going there,
then you don't have new speakers.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, and so really the, the investment is in
that acquisition part of, we know
that New Zealanders are wanting to learn in record numbers.
We have a shortage of teachers, uh, in Maori medium
that's about 3000.
And in, uh, English medium is 30,000.
So, you know, these, these, that therein is the problem.
So you can't get more people through that, uh,
through that infrastructure.
Can you just repeat that Sta again? So in, in my discussions
with, uh, uh, with Iona Holstead over the last three years,
she is saying that in order to satisfy the demand
for Del Maori, uh, in Maori medium,
because Maori medium's under pressure too,
because there's more kids going into the, the, that exists,
but only 20% of Maori kids are in it.
Right. Um, they need 3000 teachers to satisfy that demand
and take the pressure off the teachers in Maori medium.
And in English medium schools, they need 30,000,
30,000 Maori teachers, Maori teachers.
So, you know, that, that, that would be where I'd like
to see that investment because we'll carry
on doing what we are doing.
And, um, you know, we'll, for instance, we are focusing, uh,
over the next three years on working
with the private sector, with organizations like Sky
and Google, uh, Fonterra and,
and a number of others to really work in partnership
with them over the next three years.
Uh, you know, uh, to, to get the word out
and to bring more New Zealanders into the,
but um, in, in, in terms of that infrastructure,
at least there's some investment in that.
We, we we're asking basically, you know, an old
who could barely give us a hundred thousand
speakers to give us a million.
Um, and, and that seems to be, you know,
the definition of madness really.
So, um, uh, you know, that, that's where I'd like to see,
um, and strategically where we'd like
to see an investment too.
Great. Uh, next we've got a question from Shannon. Hal,
Sorry, do you mind if I just add a supplementary
Oh, your supplementary, yep.
Supplement. Hello, I'm Reman Ley, um, MP Tini.
Uh, if I can just add to that.
So if we go to the third goal goal you have with respect to,
um, achievement by 2000 and
and 40, um, for Ma Corona, uh,
with respect to the third goal of, um, 50,000 Maori, uh,
age 15, or over being able to use, um, te
or Maori as much as English.
Would you say that this is part of the challenge
that you've, um, you've said
that this goal is gonna be difficult to achieve by 2040.
Um, is this part of the difficulty?
Yeah, part of it is, you know, I'll give you an example.
My, my oldest son came down to Wellington in 2003,
and he, he left Wellington High.
Within three months he had finished speaking Maori to me.
Right. And so one day I had this bright idea to ask him why.
And I said, and he said to me, Papa,
all the cool songs are in English
and nobody speaks Maori on tv.
And when they do, they sort the language, right?
In other words, it's not valued.
So a big part of what we are trying to do is to get the rest
of New Zealand, they value the language, uh,
and give them a heritage that is distinctly in New Zealand.
'cause we are not Europeans, we don't live in Europe.
We live in the Pacific. And Te Maori is the only
indigenous language of this country.
So in, in, in sharing it, what we are saying
to all New Zealanders, one, you are, you know,
this connects you back to New Zealand,
but it also connects you to the rest of the Pacific.
'cause Il Maori is the youngest of the dialects
of the Pacific language,
which is why we can all understand each other.
When somebody's speaking Samoan to me,
I can understand them, or, or, or, um, or, or,
or, you know, Sian.
So a big part of what we are trying to do is to get our kids
to keep talking because it's a value, something that,
it's a language that's valued in or New Zealand.
So that, uh, that one there about getting them to speak
as much in, uh, Maori
as they do English is really, really important.
Because, you know, uh, I, I think one of my cousins said
to me, oh, you know, if all these s learn to speak Maori,
they'll take the money of our language with them.
And I said, well, that's really funny, bro,
because we've been speaking English for just about 200 years
and we still haven't pinched the man of that, have we?
Um, and it's about speaking, it's speaking
that makes our language come alive.
So the more it's used, whether it's just the K in the
morning or morning or whatever, whether it's on full on
or conversation to do Maori, it all adds up
to normalizing the language.
Um, hear me.
Thank you very much. Uh, questions.
And it's, it's a, I warned the committee before,
but it's, it's the elephant in the room currently
between Maori crown relations.
And I guess I'm concerned around the impact
that it has on al Maori in this country
and achieving, uh, your goals
and giving the pressure from this government.
What options is Tedi considering
to ensure the limited funding that you have is able
to meet the expectations to grow the number
of al Maori speakers?
And are you on track to reach the million that you need to?
Sure. I think, um, despite, uh, you know,
the current climate, I think what we have seen is that, um,
in the data that nah, we
and them have been collecting is
that there's a still a strong cohort of people
who are supportive of Tara Maori.
I think what we saw in the recent stats, you know, uh, most
of those were tracking above 50%.
Uh, and so whether it was for, um,
because I don't have my notes with me, so I'm gonna have
to wing it a little bit.
So at least over 50% for, um, support for bilingual signage,
uh, for, um, te Maori to be taught in schools
and, um, for general valuing
of the language as part of our identity.
Now, I think that, um, this, uh,
majority, uh, helps to continue the momentum
and it's our job to be reminding people around
how unifying te Maori can be,
how it becomes a distinctive part of our, um, identity
as New Zealanders.
It very much influences the way we speak English.
Um, and I think if we,
if we focus on the good
and the willing, uh, we can continue to drive that momentum.
If we are always reacting, uh, to the cynicisms
of Tara Maori, uh, then we will be, uh,
exerting too much energy, um, on trying to convert those
who probably will never get converted.
And we need to focus on our young people, uh,
and our ran as a way to be, uh, part of that movement
and continue the momentum.
So I think whilst it's easy to assume that, uh,
uh, we're working against the tide, I think what we found,
particularly in the, for the public service,
still a strong willingness by to want to be part of that,
to wanna maintain their language ability, uh,
and their professional development as a way to ensure
that we don't lose track on where we've come.
Could it be better? I'm pretty sure it probably could.
Um, but I'm really heartened by the fact
that people haven't just kind of thrown it out just
because we've changed, uh, governments, um,
and that people want to be still part of this movement.
Has there been any, um, changes to your plans given,
um, the fiscal environment,
and what feedback has the minister given you in regards
to the long-term plan to date
At this stage? Um,
in our meetings, uh, where we met as the whole of Rio,
so all the different components of, uh, that sit under the,
the legislation was, uh, mahi corona is due
for renewal anyway.
So this is an opportunity for the house to come together
and rethink what our goals are
and how we might, um, implement them.
So it's probably premature to predict
what that might look like.
Um, because we are meeting in October
to have a look at that review, the status of our, um,
Corona and what needs to be done in that.
And given, given the funding impacts to, for Maori, um,
in, in recent decisions by this government, does
that create concerns, uh, for the impacts that
that might achieve to you achieving
the plans that you wish to?
I think it would be fair to say that, you know,
we are concerned,
but of course we're living in a, in a time of uncertainty.
And so we haven't had that opportunity
to have the conversation, uh, directly
with the minister about the, the future direction
of the Mahi Corona.
Um, but now we, uh, works closely alongside uni
and the other agencies to be able to work through
how we might, uh, position, uh, the future of il, uh,
to be able to at least engage with the minister as to the
possible opportunities for us.
I'm gonna go, because we, you've had three subs, um,
just a reminder team
that we do have the Maori Language Commission coming in at
the end of this year to talk about the annual
review going forward.
So this, we are here to talk about the 20 22, 20 23 year,
and to the extent of future focused stuff.
I mean, certainly the tables that have been, um, tabled,
but I'll ask, we'll go now to
Karta. Oh, thank you.
Um,
and Professor Higgins for talking about, um,
the individuals within public services who are taking on
that we, or to, um, keep the, the real alive
and well within our public services, um,
despite the government's stance on rolling back the use
of TRE in the government sector.
So how can TE still look to support,
um, the use of TRE in their offices
and daily interactions, um,
beyond just the individual wanting that, um,
wanting that feel?
Sure. I mean, without wanting to generalize too much,
because I'm, I'm not sure workings of, of each, um,
government agency, but I guess INI
and others might be able to, um, comment on this
with more specificity, um, as they work closely with, uh,
those agencies and their language plans.
But our desire is to continue to support people
with those language plans, to enable them to see
how they can engage their
agencies in the mahi that they do.
And I think that's, uh, you know, as a language planner,
it's really important to, um, be able to provide that kind
of support to the language champions inside of those, uh,
agencies to give them the right kind of trip, uh, tip tips
and tricks to, um, help, um,
support the momentum in there.
And, you know, considering that, you know,
this is a three generational transformation, uh,
you know, it take, there's a lot, um,
that can be achieved in little activities.
And I think when you don't overwhelm, it can often, um,
if you overwhelm people with too much,
it's easy to be turned off.
And that's kind of the nature of a second language learner,
particularly adult second language learners, um,
that they can get kind of caught up too much in the I need
to be fluent by tomorrow.
Yes. Um, by end of financial year.
And that's never gonna happen
because it is part of that process.
And largely as, uh, second, you know,
understanding second language acquisition, uh, helps us
to be able to inform those language champions on, on,
you know, keeping up the momentum.
But I Willi and others for other specificity on that mahi.
Yeah, there's a number of things that we do.
There's the, um, the kawi,
which are held on a monthly basis, which brings staff
and from various government organizations
to talk about language planning
and providing them with knowledge
and workshops that help them to, to do their jobs.
The other one that we are, we're running
at the moment is the URA deal.
So it's the public service URA deal.
We've run two in this financial year.
Um, and there was, there was, there was no doubt that the,
the funding cuts have had an impact, um,
because, uh, people who registered, let,
let say in September last year had withdrawn
because there was no longer money there for them to pay
for them to come to the, but other than that, um,
the second Del we ran had the 60 people
or so that we were looking for.
Um, and the thing for, for them is I think it's a place
of comfort and safety because people are not feeling
that safe in, in, in the, um, public service at the moment.
So being there for them is really,
really something we want to be.
But the other thing too is actually getting out there and,
and really, um, finding out how people are going on.
And we have to pop a hor all, which is, uh, 16 agencies
that come together, agency CEOs that get together, uh,
to talk about how we can support the implementation
of the mahi Corona and the public service.
Um, and we make decisions about that.
We, um, are in a bit of a holding pattern at the moment
because we, we have an old mahi Corona,
and that's being refreshed hopefully
within the next two or three months.
But the good thing for us is it gives us us a chance, uh,
to reevaluate and, um, see how we go in the future.
And one of those future directions is working
with the private sector, um, and not just for, for a year
or six months or for a particular, um, event,
but for the next two years
and ensuring that one, that that relationship,
those relationships are sustainable
because we've only got, um, you know, a certain amount
of staff, but also making sure that they're getting
as much benefit from us, uh, from it as we are.
Um, because there's nothing like being in a relationship
where you're doing everything right.
Um, so, so we really want to make sure that we are working
with these people in good faith,
and it's not just about taking money off them or whatever.
Um, so, and you'll probably see the first
of those over the next couple of months, um, when, uh,
because we're working with Sky at the moment,
who've been amazing.
Um, and of the Olympics coverage was, was awesome too.
And we did a, um, a glossary of words
with them in the New Zealand Olympic, uh, committee called.
And so those sporting terms now are being used in, you know,
it's nice to use instead of telling the kid to, you know,
at the backboard, you can say, right, Mm-Hmm.
Those types of things. So, um, look, it's a, it's a, it's,
it's really important for us
to work in good faith with people Mm-Hmm.
Um, and to work with people, um, you know,
from all backgrounds, really, really important.
Next we have a, uh, Partai from Ha, Rafa might
Clark.
Um,
um,
uh, so just asking, what are the top three challenges maybe
that you guys are currently facing at the moment
that you might wanna let the committee know?
Um, yes. In supplementary,
Yes. Yes, please. Um,
um,
um, and then,
so just, um, asking, there's quite a lot of generational,
um, approaches and strategies that would have
to take knowing that, um, you know, our grandparents had
to have relearn and then so did our parents,
and then us being first language speakers,
there would be a lot of different variations
and approaches to that.
So you just, Yeah.
Language planning. So
that intergenerational language transmission, that focus
that TE has is around how
to think about those intergenerational transmissions for us,
for te and for the ma Corona, the,
uh, vision is around, uh, setting the right conditions,
uh, in society that allows the language to flourish.
Because in the generations of your grandparents that
where language was not allowed, uh,
and not visible, you start to devalue your language.
So our role as a society
and our role for is to show that there is value
for our society and having the language,
so those like yourself who are first language speakers
are never, uh, subjected to feeling embarrassed
for being able to use the language.
And so each generation has its role,
and not every generation has to be fluent,
but in order to restore that native language speaking
child, it does take time.
And so we do need to have different approaches
and this approach, but
that focuses on micro language planning
versus macro language planning, um, is something
that is relatively new since the new legislation.
People are still getting their heads around it
because we've always kind of done a one size fits all.
Um, but I feel like we're just kind of getting our, our, um,
our straps on.
And so I'm really excited about the opportunity
to look at the Mahi Corona refresh
and where we can go from there
because we had to help people, uh,
understand language planning.
And because I'm a nerd and I'm a professor,
and this is my jam, I could talk about it all day,
but I know that, uh, you've got other questions, probably
Not. I, I actually just
have a sup on that.
Um, there's a generation
of urban Maori out there like myself
that are learning as adults.
Um, you know, it is embarrassing to be Maori
and to not really know your language well.
So I just wondering if you can comment over strategies,
you know, the commission may
or may not have to encourage those urban Maori to
just make a fool of themselves, get into it,
and, um, do the Mai Do the mai.
Absolutely. And I just wanna commend you on taking
that journey because it is, it's long.
And that because it's part of our heritage,
it becomes quite an emotional journey.
It's not just around acquiring another language
because it's part of our, our heritage language
and the consequences of where whanau end up
and how they gotta, uh,
the language they have in their family can be hugely
personal, uh, and hugely, uh, deeply emotional.
Um, because of that sense of connection to identity,
I think our role in is to try
and encourage people to use
that language, uh, where they can.
And Ashi, we said at the beginning,
we try to do it with kindness.
We try not to try, we actively work towards trying
to get people to use what they have.
Now as a second, uh, as a second language learner myself,
uh, I've put on a lot of years, uh,
into learning the language,
and I'm still learning every day.
And I think one of the things that as New Zealanders, um,
you know, uh, in the eighties, I think, um,
Dr. Ray Harlow talked about as a country we were doggedly,
monolingual and attitude and behavior and use Mm-Hmm.
But now we are starting to come around
to seeing bilingualism as, uh,
or multilingualism as just part of the norm.
And we need to nurture that.
And as adults, we need to kind of face our own demons.
But, so for us for is to try and help you, um,
or, or slay the, uh, that can often overwhelm adults
as speakers, as second language learners, and try
and give people encouragement to use what they have and try
and learn more as they get as as they progress
with their language journey.
We've got one more, um, Partai on this
question from Shannon Halbert.
And then we've got a couple more people,
Questions, kapa and I, I agree with that,
which particularly is about the goals
and aspirations of TE Maori.
And then at the same time I go back to the example
of Waka Tahi removing, um,
te Maori names from the signage.
And I wonder how consistent that is with, um, the goals
and aspirations of the mahi that you are doing.
And if there's any other departments that have,
that you've seen with examples where, um,
the language has started to take steps backwards.
Can, can I just, um, can I just refer the members
to speakers rule in 2 2 9 around relevance?
Um, this is an annual review on 2 20 22, 20 23.
If, if you wanna ask future direction questions
around the statement of performance, that's fine.
But, um, we are actually coming,
this commission is coming back in December
where you'll be able to ask those questions.
So, you know, I, I'm not gonna be a stickler about this,
but you got two other members that have earnest questions,
I'm guessing, and I am referring the member
to, um, speakers rolling.
2, 2, 9. Sorry,
Mr. Chair, you ref,
are you saying that my question is not No,
I'm very flexible, but I'm,
I'm merely encouraging the committee to stick with the kopa
of this session, um,
because we've got two more members
that have earnest questions
and we are now straying outside the boundaries
of the Kopa of today.
I don't believe we are. Okay. Yeah. Go.
I, sorry, Mr. Chair.
I think you're being quite unfair there
because I did ask you, uh, have I moved outside
of the speaker's rulings and,
and you said I'm not class, so either I am or I am, um,
The, the, am I or am I not outside speak?
No. Professor can ask, answer the question.
I'm merely encouraging members that we have,
we actually have a minute left.
We've actually got two other members that have questions,
so I'd encourage, uh, professor to answer the question.
And we've got a couple more questions for you.
So, um, um,
I don't have on me, um, for obvious reasons, uh, any, um,
data on the, uh, beyond Waka,
uh, from a language planning perspective, though, if I speak
to that, I think it is important to try
and encourage bilingual signage, um,
and, uh, as much as possible
because it does, that visibility helps support.
But in terms of your, since we're coming back,
we can collect more information for you for,
for that, for the next.
Alright. We'll try and get through two more.
Thank you so much. Um,
you may have seen over the last little while
that translation is quite a, um, big topic of conversation,
and I applaud you for having the glossary for the Olympics.
What a wonderful idea
and a way to really, um, make accessible that
to so many people.
So can you tell us about
how many translators graduated from your
program in the last year?
And are you seeing a maintenance of numbers
of translators coming through?
What are the current trends you're seeing
and what can we do more to help grow your board?
Translators,
Mark, I,
Uh, look the, the, the, the number of translators who we,
we, um, uh, we certified in the year as,
as, as in information.
The, um, the interesting thing though is we've had a, uh,
a bit of a, a clash of heads with MB
who have sent out a direction
to all translators in the country, uh,
to do the Australian qualification.
Now, this is proposed, um, significant questions
for particularly who, um, and,
and most of their translators are older people
who don't have a thousand dollars to go and sit
and exam in Australia or online.
Um, so what we've, what we've been doing is reworking
because we realized that our, um, our old translation
or our old qualification only addressed two of the areas
that most international translation qualifications address.
So that's, uh, for instance, translation
and, um, interpretation.
What we needed to add to that was it ethics and English.
Um, because one of the things we're finding, I get some
of my cousins turn up native speakers who expect the pass.
And look, I've got a real problem with the name
of the qualification to Maori
because, uh, my cousins who don't pass,
they turn it into something else, right?
Um, and I'm sure Han knows what I'm talking about,
but it, it's, um, it, it, what
what it is really is redeveloping the qualification over the
next two years so that we have a qualification
that's at international, um, uh, standard
and that addresses those particular areas.
But in the meantime, having, um, an interim measure
to ensure that we keep numbers going through.
Um, and, and that means, you know, there,
there are quite a few people around the place
and, um, I won't name any,
but there are with, you know, highly proficient Maori, um,
who don't need to sit an exam, who can provide us
with evidence that we can assess Mm-Hmm.
To see whether they're at the standard.
So there's a whole lot of work going on in that regard.
Um, but we realize, you know, that, um, there's a, a, a,
a demand out there for translation,
but we also find people are using ai
and that's another area.
Um, our, our relationship with Google for us is really,
really important because if you look at the last general
social survey, it says that 7.9% of New Zealand is now,
say they speak toil fairly well, it's
around about 450,000 people.
About 300,000 thousand Maori, and 150,000 are non marden.
And I would expect that as we head towards that million
goal, we'll start to find that the number
of non Maori speakers starts
to outstrip the number of, of Maori speaking.
And it's something that we should not be frightened of
because you, you know, in some ways you can have your cake
and eat to, so if you want people to be able to speak Maori
so that when you go to the bank or the shop
or go to school, they can speak Maori back to you,
then the rest of the country has to learn.
Mm-Hmm. So there, there is, um, for us, the, you know, one
of the big issues is around tech and around ai,
but not about how we can, you know, knock it to the side,
but how we can work with it
because we are so far behind in terms of working, um, in
that IT area that we really need
to start making up some ground.
But, um, look, in terms
of the translation here, it's really, really important.
Um, but it's really, really important too
that we get our, our qualification. Right.
Yeah, I was just sort impressed with the trove of, um, um,
translators that you are bringing out.
So really commend you on the mahi that you're doing
and wanted to shine a light on that. We got, um,
Question from Greg Fleming.
Oh. Um, so, yeah.
Um,
um,
yeah.
Um, oh yeah.
Um, um, yeah.
Um, no, I was just saying, I think realistically I've got
so many questions that rather than dive into it, oh,
so very, very briefly, um,
just get rather excited about this.
This is, this is, this is it.
If you gimme any more compliments, my will start to show,
And this is, this is it, right?
This is the, um, I guess maybe, maybe I'll ask the question.
I'll, I'll make, make a statement.
I ask the question and, and then we pick it up in,
in another, another, um, uh, the, the,
the goal of a million people to be able to speak, um,
somewhat confidently by 2040, uh, the, and the, and
and, and the fact that so,
and that that reasonably modest goal of 50,000, um,
15 year olds, uh, speaking fluently, um,
you know, ha um, the, the fact that we are, we are,
we're missing that second one, which I'm guessing is,
is a direct result of the fact that we,
we don't have anywhere near enough Maori that,
that I hold those two things in tension.
And then I, and then I, I guess I also hold with that I'm a,
I'm a history student and I'm aware of the fact
that this project for which we've all embarked on, uh,
called order
or it's never been accomplished in history,
like once the language Yeah.
And that's why once it starts to go,
yeah, that's why we sing.
You know, um, um, sorry to
Cut the member off. We, we, we've
Got more questions, so just get your question and let them
Answer it if you can.
Have you guys, have you guys started working on, on, uh,
on, on, on a detailed plan as to how we achieve the number
of kayak core that we actually need to sell?
And, and, and I'm sure my,
my chair's got something to say about this Look.
Um, it's the infrastructure thing going, right? Yeah.
So there are a couple of
things that are missing at the moment.
We have no Maori policy for the public sector.
That's the first thing. Um, uh,
at the recent tribunal deal claim, um, I made the case for
that to be returned to at the moment.
It sits with, um,
but have bigger fish to fry than Il Maori.
And as a result, we don't have, um, il Maori policy
that we'd like it back because, you know, we are,
you know, il Maori is our mate.
We, that's what we do. That's our bread and butter.
Um, it's not something we dabble in.
It's something that we get into wholeheartedly.
Um, and look, so that's the first thing.
There's no ter Maori policy.
There's a workforce policy statement with the, um,
allowance has mentioned in it,
but there is no, um, ter Maori policy for the government
and that that needs to be done.
The second thing is, is that we need
to start looking at the infrastructure.
Uh, look, it's impossible.
Uh, I think it took us about a month to find him a
or a pun to be in.
Um, and we put him into a, um, into a kindergarten
for a while and he would sit from about one o'clock in the
afternoon waiting for his mother to come and pick him up.
'cause nobody was speaking Maori tongue, right?
He was used to that. Mm-Hmm.
So there is some infrastructural things that need to be,
to be looked at to be able to resolve some of these issues
that, that we are, um, we are looking at today.
Yeah. Can I just, um, um, underscore what ahi we said
around the, um, Maori language policy development?
I think one of the challenges we have as the commission,
because we don't have that function,
and yet it's our, you know, our very existence relies on
that in order to create a detailed plan
around achieving those numbers needs to be able
to influence and drive policy.
A lot of the policy that's related
to te Maori falls under Maori development in the general.
And so it's not actually looking at language revitalization
and its specificity.
And so we have been challenging to, to, you know,
release some of that function to us so that it enables us
to influence, enables us to
rationalize why bilingual signage is important,
rationalize why we need to increase the numbers of teachers,
and how we think about that over, over a course of time.
And, but that becomes one of the, we can, we can influence,
um, and, and kindness,
but it's a little bit different when you've got the actual
levers to be able to make that change.
And we got, um, so many questions we wanna ask,
but the final question is for Reman Ley.
Uh, thank you. Thanks Mr. Chair.
Look, just really quickly, um, yeah,
this is the part I don't like to,
but if we can just, I'm just gonna look at some of the, um,
responses to written questions and, um,
and just with respect to, um, to corporate gifts
and hospitality staff that were received in the last, um,
financial year, um,
I understand like is really important in, um, in, in,
in the right settings,
but I just want to please question, um,
and if you can just, um, help me understand with respect
to a koha that was given to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Trade and NOI delegation, um, a thousand dollars on
what basis, if you can please record.
It was back in June, um, last year.
Just wanna know. Yeah. Um, kind of how did that fit in to,
to call her page twenty five twenty five?
Do you want me to, and like I said,
I totally respect when Koha is, um, yeah.
Is given for different, um, settings,
but just with this one it just, um,
it just struck me like I didn't under Oh yeah,
Yeah. Can you please talk
me? Sorry that, that was for a visit
to new, so we went to visit new Air, ah,
and the new air, um, language commission,
and so we put down a of a thousand dollars to help with,
uh, hosting of us.
Thank you. I'll say it over there. Alright.
Maybe just to up on that is how,
how are your financials tracking?
I mean, um, in your statement of intent,
there's some pressures on your costs, um,
various line items going up,
but how, just, you know, briefly, how, how's your financial
expenses going for this year?
Uh, look, we, we, we were on track.
We've budgeted for another overspend.
Um, and, and look,
the overspends in previous year has been around.
We were advised to get rid of our, our reserves
to improve our chances of, of getting bids through.
Um, but now we are looking to cut back to a, um,
over the next two years to a balanced budget so
that we are not, uh, overspending.
And also probably to, um, letting go one of our floors.
Um, uh, essentially we got that second floor
as a waste space for, um, you know, to
Maori in, in government.
Um, but without any, any pressure, uh,
cost pressure bits going through in the next three years,
we'll struggle to keep that.
But, you know, it's like everything.
You, you cut your cloth,
you got your money, you cut your cloth.
You know, our, our own financial modeling is telling us
that if we continue our current rate of spending,
we will be insolvent by 2027.
So we, the board is aware of that.
I'm aware of that, or Moneybag here is aware of it.
And so we, we watch everything. So, yeah. Can
Pie, uh, look, we've run out of time.
Thank you so much for, uh, coming before us today.
Uh, professor, uh, thank you for dialing in,
given the circumstances,
and, uh, we look forward to seeing you in December.
There's a really, really enriching conversation.
So we look forward to picking this up again in September.
Sorry, you, uh,
My daughter came back from university in
There. This
must be everybody from tomato
y ura.
Yes.
Um, so everybody from Wai, uh,
this is a public session.
Um, it's not an annual review.
This is a, you know, chance for, um, uh,
yourselves to come
before the committee to understand how things are going.
Um, so it's our pleasure to welcome you here today.
We've got members from across parliament here, uh,
and we've got about, um, um, just under
kind of 40, yeah, 45 minutes, let's just say.
Um, so if you wish to, um, uh, open with, uh,
maybe some brief statements
and then throw it out to questions, um, over to you.
So, uh, we've got people from the board, from tomato y uh,
the executive team,
and, um, the co-chair as well.
So, am I missing anybody?
Chu We also have members from ah,
Yeshi from across.
Yes. Okay.
Um, so over to you for some brief opening remarks,
and then we'll throw it into questions.
We have a presentation, I'm just trying to get out.
I'm sorry.
Um, and thank you for the opportunity.
Um, we were here last year, enjoyed our time last year. Mm.
Um, so have taken the opportunity to, um,
first of all, um, from this per perspective
of Mahi Maori, um, who we are
and what we do, um,
and is a response to crisis,
the loss of language identity in our homes, uh,
hapu iwi communities.
Um, and it was a response to,
uh, the many struggles over the years in 1972.
Uh, that response was in the form
of the Maori language petition on the 14th of September.
Um, and we recognized the 14th of September mm-Hmm.
And Maori Language Day, uh,
and which became Maori Language Week from 1975,
we had been celebrating Maori language day and week.
Wow. Um, so that time is near,
but we understand as
and as, uh, real advocates, real champions,
uh, that the struggle is still, uh, in front of us.
And the many, uh, the many governments that we have,
um, faced, uh, throughout the years, um,
have brought with them, uh, some opportunities.
And also, um, what is the opportunity, uh,
that we see today and expressing who we are and what we do.
So this response, the crisis, uh, has taken many forms.
And as I mentioned earlier, the Maori language petition.
Uh, and I remember Han, uh,
Hannah's namesake and one of our Mary Maori leaders,
advocates of Te Maori, who was not a speaker herself,
but felt the loss of language
and her generation, the loss of language.
And, and so Una as a product
of all her efforts
and the efforts of our many Maori leaders,
many Maori language advocates throughout the years.
And here we arrive as faces of that,
um, response to crisis.
Uh, and if we could just go to the, the slide,
and you would've heard, uh, the Tori, which is a
government entity.
Um, and we are the faces of community pu
and we are led by Pu Iwi and community,
and we are not a public entity.
Mm. Uh,
and our main focus is
to restore ma a nurturing first language in our homes.
And we understand more than anything
that if the language is spoken within the home, um, parents,
by parents, and by tam, our language will, uh, will thrive.
Absolutely. Next slide.
In the Maori Language Act, Maori 2016, we established
because of the act and
because of the efforts as I, as I mentioned earlier,
the response to crisis, the response to loss of language
and, and, um, identity within.
And here we are today as
a active partner with the Crown
and in partnership with the Crown.
And that partnership we see as a authentic partnership,
as a partnership that is, um, not transactional,
but transformative partnership and a partnership of equity
and ura, uh, as you would've heard by,
um, their perspective on what RA is.
But the, is a symbol of that partnership
and how Ma Maori
and Ma Corona absolutely able to work together to ensure
that our language thrives and is a living language.
And our focus as explained
before, is to ensure
that it is the first at nurturing language
of our next slide.
Uh, focus is focused on community, whanau,
hapu, Marai, and Iwi.
And we have, this is reflected in, uh,
our membership board membership where our board members,
over half of our board members represent Iwi clusters, uh,
Kahu Iwi and that Kawi.
And then we have KU who represent maga, uh,
and also Urban Maori,
uh, which is the Iwi radio stations
and Uri Maori, uh, communities who are advocates
of per Maori within our communities have
and have, uh, within the legacy groups, uh, Maori women
as well, fairly, the legacy groups that still
to this day, um, are absolutely, uh,
in the front of or Ko Maori revitalization
of per Maori in their communities.
Next slide. And
as we are a base, a community based, whanau based pu Iwi,
uh, board, we have community based advisory panels
consisting of real experts.
And some of those real experts are here today,
practitioners champions.
They are our eyes and ears on the ground in our communities.
And because our communities are, are diverse
and varied, um,
this gives us a good insight into the needs of our community
and our f of our whanau.
And they also are on the panel assessing, um,
those in initiatives.
And, uh, all of those, uh, initiatives come from
marai, whanau, community Iwi and Hapu.
And as you see here, the, our, um, board
co-chairs, we have a co-chairs,
and we work together to ensure that the initiatives,
uh, and all the mahi that we do
and our advocacy of TE Maori, uh, is true
to what the community demands
and what our wau demands of us, and what our hapu
and iwi demand of us.
And as you see, there are seven kawi, a representatives,
and four Kawi next slide.
And each of those, um, they understand the priorities
that they have within their community where, um,
the initiatives need to be focused,
whether it's Mara based programs, uh,
uh, resources that some Mara Hapu and Iwi need,
and the creation of those resources
and the focus of those resources
and the focus of the, so each,
uh, have their own focus and, and imperatives
and priorities, which are unique to their kawi iwi,
which are unique to their communities.
And, uh, we understand through research
that this community based focus works.
This community based focus, uh, works for our au works
for our Mara, our Hapu and Iwi next slide.
And over when we're established.
In 2017, the total investment had been 68 million
a pittance of, um, what the, uh,
mahi Corona spend, uh, in a year.
And so this has been since 1917.
And the breakup of that, um, spend within our Kawi iwi.
And then across to, um, our,
and our annual appropriation has stayed in the slide
17 million and the community based model.
And all our investments come to 15 mil, that's over 15 mil.
And the partnership at leadership, um,
that is our partnership with government entities, uh,
and also, uh, other entities outside of the Kahu Iwi,
uh, in order for us to advocate for TE Maori
and its inclusion and, uh,
everything we that we do in ua, and that's across councils
and across government agencies, as I mentioned before.
And our operations just over 3 million.
Uh, and just
for FYI, our audit, ticketing assessment, next slide.
Very good. Very good.
And so last year, uh, what we aim to do every year
is come together, uh, as, uh, uh, Mai,
which includes Iwi hapu au and community,
and to discuss and, um, assess what the year,
um, has brought us and,
and all of the, um, challenges as well.
Um, but all the opportunities, um, that have, um,
been fully embraced by all of our community groups, our wau
and Hapu, and our advocacy
and our revitalization efforts, Maori.
And as I mentioned earlier, there is a unique, uh,
and, um, prioritized focus on one to the next.
So the sharing of all that information, the sharing of, um,
the, the struggles
and the sharing of all the opportunities seen throughout,
uh, that year is important for us to all share, uh,
as a ma Maori as communities in whanau.
And, um, the opportunity also to have a Hui is always,
uh, fully embraced by, uh, all of us.
Uh, and, um, it's a celebration every year
of all of the, um, the efforts of the many.
And it takes many, uh, when it comes to the revitalization
of, of Rio Maori and the response to Crisis.
Next, next slide.
And we just have a, um, a short, um, video.
And it's a, a small look
and insight into, um, three of the,
the initiatives that we supported.
And they are community, whanau, iwi, and hapu base.
Uh, they represent all generations
and, um, those who benefit are from all generations.
And it's, uh, our, uh, as we look towards
what this year has brought, it's definitely a,
a very true example of that.
Can you play the video there in the next slide?
Press it one more time.
Oh, thank you. Not for, is a, is
that a play button to the link?
Oh,
uh,
damn.
The next one, you can do it live for us.
We've sum the song already Beautiful.
Um, but the, the video which hopefully we get,
we will play, uh, either soon
or at the end of our presentation, uh,
is a focus on, uh, three kahu, uh, three,
three areas.
Uh, and that is atu.
And the ATU is a small farming community.
And what we've seen in our small farming communities
is an absolute loss of language.
And if I just go back to the fifties, um, there was, uh,
the language was thriving
and it was the number one language spoken throughout the
valley in Matu.
And to the extent that, um,
farmers were all the also Maori speakers Mm-Hmm.
And they were Maori speakers
because they needed to communicate,
and that they, they knew the, the importance of being able
to share, and not only only the culture,
but share with their workers
and their community allies, the importance of,
um, the land.
And essentially that is what, um, tu
and their, um, is doing right now,
is reinvigorating, restoring what was, um,
commonplace then, which is no longer.
And they're, um, at a point where, um, they have
all generations that attend this,
and not all of them live in Atu,
but um, those who have moved to Gisborne and, and Nap
and Hastings come back every year for that.
And then we have is
our Waka based program.
And what is unique to is
that this Waka is a Tata.
So they are Waka, which are, um,
all the paddlers are male,
and this is a Waka Tata, which is a coming together of all,
um, female male
and those who, um, um, who identify
as other and come together
and learn what it is to ho Waka, um,
what the are around, um, around ho Waka
and the importance of Maori
and, uh, Rio Maori and culture.
Um, that pathway towards, uh,
revitalizing not only the real within the area,
but the of the Waka and of paddling
and the real of the awa and wana
and the real of the environment.
So it, it's it's holistic approach
to the Maori revitalization.
Uh, and the third is, um, Matana, which is, um,
and that, uh, language initiative, uh,
is definitely multi-generational.
And they have a generation of Atu who are in their seventies
and eighties who don't speak Maori.
They were of that generation where they were told not
to speak Maori in schools.
And that Maori is their, is their focus.
And that was also the focus of their family in order to,
um, uh, gain jobs.
And also for the, the well, uh, the,
the wellbeing of the, um, so one of the, um,
amazing outcomes of
that initiative in Torana on Matana Island is, um,
the revival of, um, practices of Maori,
uh, cultural practices within their, um, within the island
and also within the marae.
And the fear that the, the old people had of
speaking Maori and the barriers of speaking Maori
and all those barriers are no longer as, um, they turn to
what revitalization looks like for them.
What are their priorities
and the importance of being able to speak Maori
to their grandchildren
and to their children, which wasn't an option before
and is now an option.
Next slide. Um, so one of the audacious goals
of, and you would've heard this with,
is 1 million speakers.
And, um, the speakers is not necessarily
absolutely fluent, but there's an understanding there.
But for our audacious goal, uh, gold
or the Ma Maori is by 2040, um,
25% of all Maori children, their first language is TE Maori.
And we see through, uh, the many initiatives
and the support of our immersion schools
and our iwi based, um, immersion schools
that did this, this audacious goal is actually not as far,
uh, in the distance as we thought 10 years ago,
but it is within grasp and it is in within reach.
Um, so as we head towards our audacious goal of,
um, Maori being the first
and nurturing language within our homes,
it is definitely within my grandchildren's, um, reach
and that's why we are here today.
K. Uh, next, next. Sorry. We, and
Yes, so thank you,
honorable.
So, um, I've been given the part to speak, um, of the SOI
that we crafted and designed not too long ago.
And so, uh, my background, it's a little bit
of background here, so you know,
I'm not speaking out, uh, somewhere.
Um, 25 years ago, 25 years ago, I, uh,
spent a bit of time studying, uh, voyaging
and ion knowledge in Hawaii, um, under Clay Birdman
and Shorty Birdman, who are students of, uh,
I don't know if you know og, who they referred to as Papa Mo
from Micronesia, from a small south, um, al called.
And, uh, this, this, this gentleman, um, Papa Mo
is responsible for the regeneration, revitalization
of voyaging and navigation knowledge, traditional voyaging,
non instrument voyaging navigation knowledge throughout the
world, especially in Oceania.
And so some 4,000 years ago,
ancestors were traversing the ocean.
I mean, we can look at the, the research
around the Lata people who were traders, um,
between Micronesia and Melanesia and, um, Polynesia.
And they were, they, they were trading, um,
things like shells and, and tools
and other obsidian and other things.
And so the Maori ancestors come off these ancestors
and, uh, uh, roughly around, I mean,
arguably it depends on the research you read,
but, um, uh, if you, if you, if you look at the traditions,
our ancestral traditions passed down by our various
and numerous significant waka.
We all come from canoes. Um, and there aren't seven.
There were some 300 that were making, uh,
these trips across the ocean.
Maori come from around the society islands area.
Haki is going to vary depending on the, uh, tribe, um,
that's telling the story.
But that's not the point.
The point is haki is, is, is in the Pacific.
And so we took the view when constructing this SOI,
that learning re Maori,
we are essentially taking a step back into the past to go
to the future and then returning again.
So it's not a one-way linear journey.
It's, it's, it's a, it's a, it's a circular journey.
It's a cyclic journey.
It's a journey where you'll take a step forward and fail.
Then you need some support,
and you stay, you, you end up thinking, oh man,
I can't learn this language.
This is so hard. And then you get your support from uncle
or auntie or your teacher or who, whomever it is,
and then have, have the strength again to move forward.
So that was the, um,
the mentality we took into constructing this SOI
and soi for those of us that aren't unaware of that term.
Uh, Hawaii's not Hawaii.
Um, haki is, is a geographical and a spiritual destination,
and they can coincide concurrently.
Um, and I spoke in my mi about a, a spiritual language,
a creative language, a um, a language of belief,
a language of courage, a language of, um,
ancestral groundings and a language of the environment.
Very much so. And the language of the canoe
that you see there is the language of the sky, the language
of the ocean and the wind.
And they are, they are of the dominion of our ua,
which are probably cald in these starvings in this.
And so we believe we belong to, we don't actually own,
we don't own the environment we belong to.
Um, we, I am,
because I believe not, I, not I think
therefore I am Kyle.
I am because I, I am
because I think, so we belong to,
and we come from a, a genealogy.
And the genealogy is found.
Um, in particular the CSO wine was, was, um,
was a trace, a return back to, to the ancestral space
and spoke about Ana to the future, the audacious goal,
the audacious goals,
and the potential to have a better future,
to have a better world, to have a stronger language,
stronger traditions, and that we could, um, in enhance sense
and scale that into the future.
And so, yeah, that, that's, um, and we will see some stars.
I can't remember the, if the presentation talks about stars,
but this room here is named Maui.
Now Maui is the first navigator in our traditions,
right around the Pacific.
You go up to Mesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia.
In Oceania, they have a cogni of the name, Maui,
Maui, Langa, some islands, Maui and other islands.
But Maui is this, this, um, really important, uh, person
who was probably a bit of a troublemaker, like,
but also a courageous, uh, politician like my uncle, uh,
KU Morgan, you know?
And so I'm not talking, this is the truth.
And so, um, Maui in our traditions, we talk of
that, uh, scorpius, you'll see scorpius
in the night sky at the moment.
If you look up at night, you'll see Scorpius,
which is the fish hook.
And it's, um, just above that island there.
And Maui, I suppose.
We, we believe, we, we, we've been, we have been colonized
to believe that Maui went fishing throughout this magic
jawbone, put blood on it and fished up this, this land.
He came on Maui. Mm-Hmm.
And we, we are here, eh, on Maui, Maui's fish.
But actually they were navigation instructions
from us grandmother.
And those navigations
and instructions, um, were from within the sky, the M of
and, um, tomato Maui.
It's not. And you travel around Oceania.
We all know this constellation to be named
the same Maui.
It's attributed to Maui.
And so Maui appears, Maui's fish hook appears in the sky,
and off that fish hook, you'll see the Milky Way.
And it's no coincidence or surprise that Polynesians and,
and Melanesians and Micronesians call that constellate call
that galaxy, something to do with the fish.
So in Maori, we call that either
or the long fish
or the long shark.
That's what the galaxy of the Milky Way is,
is called in our traditions.
Um, lo and behold, when you look at the night sky,
especially in summertime, Feb, uh, this no, end
of November through to February on a a setting sky,
you'll see that constellation standing up like this
on a sunset, not a sunrise.
And it's going to appear to be hooking up the Milky Way.
Now, if you're traveling from the society islands
to the Cook Islands,
'cause that's the voyaging route, society islands,
cook Islands to New Zealand.
If you're on that trajectory
and that, that, um, path,
you're gonna be traveling west, Southwest.
That's the voyaging, um, compass West, Southwest.
Now the constellation in the sky, then na
near this was this constellation here,
and the galaxy of the,
and other, other prominent stars like the Gemini
twins, they'll be behind.
They'll be behind them.
And it's written in, it's in our,
it's just the hard part is decoding it.
Uh, you'll have, which is behind you.
And Maki was the signal for the ancestors to leave Hawaii.
It's a different tradition now here in New Zealand,
because it's coming up at a different time of the year.
But the voyaging window was from November
through to February.
And there's all this research
and evidence to prove that, um,
other prominent stars are stars,
like the Nu and the Taranaki.
People follow ang and, and itch.
Our proverb is this really
before I move on, is this proverb, which goes,
which means the setting Sun West, Southwest, Mm-Hmm.
That direction. The west, southwest.
And so, um, RA, which is Ana, Ana is going
to be setting, is going to be setting
during that voyaging window.
And the Gemini twins are going to be rising
when they leave Hawaii.
So those, that was the inspiration, uh, we wanted
to embed in our SOI
and that it meant really, it meant we are doing two
or three things with this.
Obviously, it's going to track our journey.
That's one thing. That's the sort
of literal linear thinking.
But we, we need to start, um,
teaching these stories to our kids.
Yeah, yeah.
And teaching the, to teaching the science, the astronomy,
the astrology and the, and the science
and crossing over, you know, it's that tension that, um,
there's pko and then there's science.
Uh, we have the science and the pko.
We just said the brains need to get together
to, to decode it.
Yeah. So then we go there.
Uh, can we go to the next slide, please? Yep.
And so, moving forward to our, um,
so the catchphrase was, is,
which is ancestral homeland,
and which is the future homeland?
That's the catchphrase for our, so moving forward,
um, the Waka,
the voyaging canoe contains everything that, uh,
all the tools, all the tools in our toolbox that we require.
We need the funding, we need resources.
We need to build people, capability, capacity.
And we're trying to do that.
You can, we need a strong compass.
The ancestors knew when to go and not to go.
And they used their, their, my, my, uh,
good friend calls it Che Wilson.
He calls the, uh, I think it's in the Nu people
and his people they call a,
which is man, we call it ura in,
we have these prophetic sayings,
and that's in reference to landmarks.
And so our,
which I spoke about the Milky Way and Tomato Mai.
And so that's where the destination is, right?
If we can imagine we're taking this journey.
And then the o and
tga, um, each, each kahu is different
and unique, um, to their own, their own ua, their own.
However, we share a common love, um, and passion
and commitment to ta Maori, uh, yeah,
that's self explanatory.
And then I, I think I've spoken enough about the Hawaii.
So it's taking all of us together, ancestors, grandparents,
uncles and aunts, and all the young ones all together
on this voyaging canoe, um, held down
by our ancestral knowledge.
I think I heard at the coronation, RA Hui said,
AI means ancestral intelligence.
I'm not sure if he coined that. I think he stole it. Yeah.
I think he'd come from someone young,
like he's over the hill.
He's, him and I, him
and I, he's the sitting here.
And so, um, yeah, uh, let me just say,
I think this is my last slide.
Um, mm. Let me just say one more final, uh, point.
Um, the language is, the language is mine.
The language is yours.
The language is his or hers,
or they hate the language is ours.
And the, the voyaging culture is ours.
It's specifically ours to our people here in,
that's what makes us who we are here.
In
Just passing on, just say one more.
Um, so I've got no idea what's on the slides,
and I need, um, I think, um,
listening to, um, ma
Maori, uh, for our people speak for ma in the South, um,
you know, when you look at, um, some of the, like,
the history of Il Maori, it might suggest that the decline
of re started in the 1950s due to a number of issues,
colonization, urban migration.
But for our people in the South, we had a young doctor
studying at med school in Dunedin in 19 18 99.
To, he, um, spent his weekends.
I can just imagine he would've been homesick, um,
craving the home cooking and things like that.
So he, he spent time at our villages and, um,
and he noted, uh, some observations, which he sent to, to
one of the Maori newspapers, which, you know,
it's taken lots of generations of, of my people to,
to learn Maori to then read those manuscripts
and unlock what, what these Una was saying.
And what he said in 1899 was,
there was not a child under the age of 16
who could speak to their mom.
So for, for us in the south, the, the, the, the
language decline happened a couple of generations
before other, other areas.
So, um, as a child growing up in my community, um,
we had zero native speakers.
Um, but I always say to my cousins,
we all have a homing device.
And, and whether you've been raised in,
in rich re environments
or not, there's a part of us, uh, for me, uh,
was re Maori, and, um, always had a fascination.
When we had ri, I watched uncles
that served in World War ii, uh, shaking their boots, having
to stand up and fulfill the obligations
and rituals of our ancestors, um,
with the very little terre that they had.
But they did it the best that they could.
And so, for all of us in our communities, what we are saying
to our people was, do your best, and that's all we can do.
And so, um, we would welcome our ri uh,
and in the best way we could.
And, um, when we had, um, uh, from the Nor, it came
with beautiful Maori, us Kato kids be sitting there wanting
to know the jokes, wanting
to laugh at the right times and things.
So that was, um, part of, part of our journey.
But, um, you know, it takes communities, um, for,
for my family, um,
the only Maori speakers in our community from, um,
and we had the urban marae spaces, um, where we would go
and, um, participate as, as, as a Maori community.
But, um, again, um, how many of you speak, um,
more than one language?
You do, you do, yeah. Awesome.
Yeah, so I mean, just that appreciation of having
to learn another language in itself.
And then, um, that response.
I call myself a possum in the headlights.
Most times when people are speaking to their me, I'm like,
oh, processing that before I can speak.
So all the time. Um,
and just seeing my uncle shake in their booth.
Um, but hiding out the back
'cause they didn't wanna be in the pie, you know,
being called to the pie.
They looked the part, but they didn't have the deal.
And so all those things that came with that,
we call it today, we talk about language trauma.
Um, and my mum, um, you know,
she sowed the seeds of passion.
Actually, hunter was an auntie to my mother,
and she came to her house once and had been recorded all
but, um, the, um, the seeds of, of, of passion
for Del Maori and, and wanting to unlock that for us.
And she sort of resigned herself to the fact that it was
beyond her generation, and she lumped
that all on our shoulders to carry.
But I guess, um, seeing, um,
that, uh, that that loss, that grief, experiencing
that in those older generations, uh, really drives
that drive my generation to want
to play our part in, in reconnecting.
And I know Joshua Fishman, uh, renowned, um, expert in
and, and language revitalization talks about takes one
generation to lose a language,
at least three to bring it back.
Mm-Hmm. So we, you know, we received these messages.
Uh, I, we have had a, a real strategy for almost 25 years,
um, that I've been privileged to be part
of my other generations word.
But these are the sorts of messages that we were receiving.
Um, and so we saw ourselves as, um, a generation
that could provide, could mend
that link that had been broken.
And, um, so that's, my husband
and I, we set out to, um, to raise our kids into the Maori,
but our vision was actually on our, we wanted
to have a relationship with our Maori.
And because we know it's more than just a language,
it's a way of living thinking.
Um, you talk about spiritual connection,
but it's a way of view our a worldview.
And so how are we gonna do that as second language learners
who have pr in our language was pretty poor in those times.
So we had to lean on, um, initiatives that were running,
and at that time they were running through toto.
But, um, and then I started, uh, working for my iwi
and du Maori revitalization.
So had these relationships was toto,
which were absolutely frustrating at the time
because we had a group of people in Wellington,
this is our view, making decisions for our community.
They didn't understand us.
They didn't know what our challenges were.
So, um, being part of why now, um, I'm so grateful, uh,
for the, the, um, support that we received from, uh,
bringing those experts from our communities, uh, to inform,
um, the decisions that we are making.
Um, it's just so crucial.
And so that for me, uh, provides, um, improvement on
what was, um,
but today, uh, I've raised three Del Maori speakers.
We say Ta Maori is their first language,
but so fluid they think in both.
And, um, they can flick in between, unlike myself
as a second language learn, or the struggle is real. Yeah.
Um, okay. I Think we're running outta
Time. We are, we're
if members we're 15 minutes over time,
so we've, we've got even more behind than we were.
But, um, this is a free flowing briefing.
I'll take a couple of questions, so if you've questions,
and I thank you, URA, Haki, Paulette,
for your contributions.
It's been really educational.
Um, but are there any burning questions from members? No.
Yeah. Okay. So we've got three questions. Okay.
So we'll take, um, Koran first.
Um, thank you so much. I was having a great time.
I would really love it if we could get, um, that,
that presentation Yes.
And be able to watch the video as well in our own time.
Um, just for the inspiration
and the aha, um, I wanted to talk about the amount
of applications that are coming into you at the moment, um,
and the overall funding allocated in each of all here,
because obviously we've got so many called COPA
and, um, only choose a certain amount.
And obviously you've got big aspirations for working
with whanau, hapu, iwi,
and so yeah, just talking about what kind
of applications are being made.
Are they classes, strategy, planning,
All of the above.
And I think, you know, as, as someone that's lived,
have a lived experience of, so that's our focus is
that intergenerational transmission of il,
it takes everything.
So you have to build capacity, we have
to build language speakers.
How do you do that? You do that through, um,
or, you know, supporting initiatives?
Um, yeah, I think it's,
And uh, we, every year we're oversubscribed, um, you know,
with, um, you only have a million
to spend every financial year,
and they get 10 million worth of proposals.
And that's, and that has grown
and grown ever, um, over the,
especially over the past three years,
because we've become more visible within our communities,
especially, uh,
and we have new groups coming in with, with,
uh, and proposals.
Um, but we are absolutely flooded
with great proposal inspiring proposals,
but we can only two, two, so many,
and that's a million when there are 10 million
to, and that's just the one.
And,
Um, and just following off of that, thank you so much.
So with, um, with these public sector
cuts to the budget, have you lost any FTE, um,
staffing, you know, that help implement these kind
of applications and, um, go through all
of the applications and decide?
We haven't, we haven't lost,
and, um, like I said, we response to the crisis,
so, um, we didn't have enough to start with.
Yeah. And so the loss is always there,
but financially we haven't lost right now.
Okay. Um, and I don't know what the future brings for us,
but obviously we're gonna be advocating that we don't lose
and that we maintain and then increase.
We still have some roles that are right.
Um, so two quick questions from Raymond then.
Greg, do you wanna go first? Oh, okay. Um, thank you.
I think many of us wish we could do a whole big thank you
introduction, which I just wanna say for the record,
I would love to, particularly the, um,
the traditional voyaging knowledge.
I felt I had to remember that I'm here in Parliament.
Um, thank you for that. Um, look, just following on, I,
I note that, um, that the, the allocation, the appropriation
for the budget 24 hasn't changed.
It's the same as as last year.
And I think that's a good reflection of, of
how important it is, um, your work is for, for, for us.
Um, but just the comment that you made earlier, um,
that I coulda you were talking about the, the, the eyes
and ears in the community, the community, um, champions.
Yes. If you can quickly just run us through what does
that look like in practice?
So what that look like, looks like in practice is Yeah.
Uh, here today, they're, they are the, the eyes
and ears for, um, Paulette.
And she is also a, a real champion and an advocate,
but they understand the community better than anyone else.
Um, they, uh, the teachers at these,
uh, they, uh, passed, um,
teachers also in those.
And so all of these, uh, members of the
understand more than anybody where the gaps are.
And so when assessing proposals, uh,
they make their decision based on what their priorities are.
Um, and also some of, um, our PTA members,
um, are in various jobs.
This is not their only job.
They have given up their time to be part of this,
this community, and they've given up
their time to be part of this.
So their actual job is usually a teacher
or, um, working in a, um, for their iwi, like Paulette.
Um, but they give their time to, um,
support these initiatives
because they understand that these initiatives do more than,
um, what the public service do for our language.
Um, and that those who lead them are those, uh,
who understand where, um, the au
hapu and iwi are struggling more than anywhere.
Mm. Um, yeah.
So for our children and up to, you know, um,
our grandparents who also are not speakers
and are following a pathway where they are
and should become what they believe is part
of their community and a confidence speaker
and a, uh, value value, what language is
and what it means to their whole w next
We got Greg em, Uh, yeah.
Um, The, the goals that you have,
um, uh, yeah.
Um, to, um,
what measurements do you have to see
how we're tracking towards them?
So this, um, the, the, the, particularly this goal of,
of 2040, seeing 25% of children under the age of seven,
being able to speak to our Maori, are we, are we measuring
that so that we can, when I, I'm, yeah.
Well want us to be on track for that because they,
because in terms of measuring it,
and then, then can we see then how we could add the res, uh,
resource where, where and how it's needed?
I mean, iwi,
so I think, um, other than the census, you know,
perhaps we could improve that.
Um, but iwi keep it, I know many iwi, and not all iwi,
but some iwi are keeping, uh, quite good records of, of
how their people are tracking.
Mm-Hmm. Around, um, engagement proficiency levels.
Um, I think you'll get some, some data from, uh,
from the education sector Mm-Hmm.
Potentially, but, um,
is there a response from the front on Pia, perhaps? Yeah.
Or just before Pia? Uh, beyond the, the stats
beyond the data, uh, for us in anyway, where I'm from in the
region, a an illustration of the growth
and development of Te Maori has seen, um, on our Mara.
And so we have Pokai mm-Hmm.
Which are annual meetings with, with, uh,
uh, they're regular, uh,
not every month, but every other month.
Sometimes there's two or three a month,
sometimes skips a month.
But their regular meetings where the tribe get together
and at, at those poke at those meetings,
we know who's who.
And then you can see the younger generation coming through.
You see the uncles and the aunts nurturing the younger ones
coming through both for male and female.
Mm-Hmm. So from a, um, a, a point of view of, of looking
and, um, you know, and guesstimating that, oh, okay.
The, the language seems to be growing in that particular,
uh, that's, uh, to add to the data and the stats
Would prefer, um, does the third statement of intent to,
um, if there's two first one report,
we find in the first session, um,
if I, on the second statement of intent,
this statement is not more deliberate in this delivery.
So not by luck or fortune
or anything else, we deliberate the statement of intent
so recommended.
But with the baseline data,
we've just spent the last year updating information system,
they can give us more agility to be able to, uh,
pinpoint the shifts, micro shifts, you know, our activity.
Okay. Um, I wanna say thank you. Yes.
And then, um, have you got, yeah, Hannah, it might be Clark
Maori, um,
toolbox.
Um, and you're more than welcome to just say, and
so just asking them kind of the significance around how
they are independent statutory entity
and how they develop that are tailored to those communities.
'cause there's different dialects, there's different hapu,
there's different iwi.
So a lot of that is quite, um, varied to different areas.
Um, and then I ask, what's some things that we can add
to their toolbox, like money,
for example, for example,
We require those in power to believe.
We require, we need the government to, to believe
and to have courage and to, um, believe in
and have compassion
and commitment to this language, to
to, to the knowledge,
to the ancestral knowledge passed down from our ancestors
that belongs to this land that we all can connect to
that makes New Zealand hotel, hotel room.
Mm-Hmm. So I,
And I was just thinking under the,
under this current model, the, it's, it's not tomato.
While creating these initiatives, it's empowering hapu
iwi communities to lead and drive their own initiatives.
So, you know, if is important, they'll,
they'll create their own ura.
We do have some, uh, national, um, but, and,
and so those ones, uh, have, there's a commitment to, uh,
sustaining those going forward.
'cause they've become legacy initiatives
for the Matu that for everybody.
Uh, but there certainly is, um,
that commitment from this board to empower our communities.
Our,
Just to add to Paul, um, absolutely over the past
two funding rounds, we've had more, um,
supportive more than we ever have.
And we've seen the growth, um, in, um,
any specific, um, dialects.
We're seeing the growth, um, generational growth from K
all the way down to our Una.
Um, and how they value their re how they, uh,
their commitment to, to re Maori their commitment
as a whanau, their commitment as a hapu and iwi,
and they can see, um, what the gaps were before
and then moving towards how to close those gaps.
Mm. And, and so, um,
are absolutely important
'cause coming together, together as a w
and hapu person, in person, and not through zooms,
but, um, creating a, a a sense of wellbeing
and belonging within a a
and hapu have seen, um,
w Hapu Iwi Flourish and Thrive.
And, um, if there are any, um, takeaways that we can, uh,
that we see more than anything is how happy
and how, um, iwi
and whanau are thriving right now
with the little money that we have.
And so, an increase in funding, absolutely.
We'll see, um, wider, um, uptake,
we'll see more whanau, we will see more habu and more iwi
and community based programs that we know work, um,
will mean that Maori are flourishing and thriving.
And I'll just hand it to my colleague Dana
Kirkpatrick to kind of, um,
Finish off. Yeah.
Yeah. Um, uh, not Thank you
so much for coming.
Um, I just wanted to make one little comment
and thanking you, uh, for the work that you do,
because it is, it is so important.
Um, and, uh, just to put it in context, um,
I am, uh, t Maki, um, my grandmother
Is from Mtu.
And, uh, um,
and she is exactly the story that you speak about, um,
and lost, uh, well, didn't lose her Leo,
but lost the ability to speak, uh, in the fifties as, uh,
married to a white farmer Yeah.
In the Mungo Valley.
And, um, and as a result, three generations later,
we are now trying to reconnect with that.
And it is, it is challenging.
Um, and it is, yeah, it is challenging for us, right.
But, uh, so I completely understand. Yeah.
Your Copa and I truly support, um,
the mission that you're on.
Uh, and I wanna thank you very much for the work
that you're doing, um, for people like me,
uh, and everybody else.
Um, but certainly, uh, the, the frustration is, is evident
and, um, and we support what you're doing.
So thank you very much and thank you for everyone
Kia.
Okay. Um, so yeah, thank you
for becoming in your presentation today,
and thank you, Dana, for your words.
Um, so that brings our briefing session to an end.